roughs in the Soret region at 433 and 446 nm could indicate the binding of CO by heme b and aa3 respectively . Spring and Riedel BMC Microbiology 2013 13:117 http //www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2180/13/117 ferricyanide-oxidized redox difference spectra Figure 6A and a cb-type oxidase became apparent in CO and dithionite-reduced minus dithionite reduced difference spectra Figure 6B 
 n the other hand in fully pigmented cells of L. syltensis and P. rubra a caa3-type oxidase seems to be prevalent which is indicated by a trough around 446 nm in CO and dithionite-reduced minus dithionite-reduced difference spectra Figure 6B 
 reviously it was shown that in the aerobic gammaproteobacterium Congregibacter litoralis C. litoralis anoxygenic photophosphorylation depends on the carbon source and incubation conditions 15 but not on the carbon concentration , which is in contradiction to the finding of Cho et al . Page 2 of 11 16 , who analysed the mixotrophic growth of the marine gammaproteobacterium HTCC2080 and found a positive correlation with very low nutrient concentrations 
 he dependence of pigment production on substrate concentration is shown by cultivation of L. syltensis DSM 22749T in defined medium with 12 % v/v O2 in the headspace gas atmosphere containing 2.5 mM pyruvate 1 , 5.0 mM pyruvate 2 and 10.0 mM pyruvate 3 as carbon source 
 . halotolerans DSM 23344T and P. rubra DSM 19751T were grown in defined medium containing 2.5 mM DL-malate 1 , 5.0 mM DLmalate 2 and 10.0 mM DL-malate 3 as carbon source . on the cellular redox poise of the facultatively anaerobic phototrophic bacterium Rhodospirillum rubrum was demonstrated by Grammel and Gosh 19 , who concluded that in this species the substrate-dependent reduction of the ubiquinone pool has a main influence on the regulation of pigment production 
 umerous independent experiments were performed to determine the influence of oxygen availability and carbon concentration on pigment expression using media containing various amounts of carbon source and/or different concentrations of oxygen in the head space gas atmosphere 
 pon incubation in complex media with malate and yeast extract as substrates the cell density in cultures of L. syltensis and P. rubra increased in light compared to growth in darkness Figure 2A and E , whereas there was no measurable effect on biomass formation in C. halotolerans in SYM medium supplemented with 0.5 % w/v Tween 80 Figure 2C , although the overall level of produced photosynthetic pigments was similar in all three strains 
 he increase in growth yield determined as dry weight was 57 % in L. syltensis and 21 % in P. rubra 
 n all three strains an increase in growth yield could be determined which was on a dry weight basis around 14 % in L. syltensis 47 % in C. halotolerans and 54 % in P. rubra 
 nterestingly no significant relationship between the cellular BChl a concentration and the photosynthetic competence in aerobic photoheterotrophic alphaproteobacteria could be found in a recent study by Sato-Takabe et al . 12 using a fluorescence induction and relaxation technique 
 t turned out that in contrast to C. halotolerans and C. litoralis the synthesis of pigments in L. syltensis and P. rubra was not only repressed by illumination with blue light but also by green LED light having a peak wavelength around 520 nm Figure 3 
 his could explain the different effects of illumination by the 40 W tungsten incandescent light bulbs used in the growth experiments shown in Figure 2 which emit spectra with a maximum intensity at around 650 nm and contain only a negligible fraction of blue light < 470 nm 
 rowth of L. syltensis DSM 22749T in the complex medium SYMHC under air atmosphere A and in defined medium with 10 mM DL-malate as sole substrate under an initial headspace gas atmosphere of 20 % v/v O2 B 
 rowth of C. halotolerans DSM 23344T in SYM medium supplemented with 0.5 % v/v Tween 80 under air atmosphere C and in defined medium with 10 mM DL-malate as sole substrate under an initial headspace gas atmosphere of 20 % v/v O2 D 
 rowth of P. rubra DSM 19751T in SYM medium under air atmosphere E and in defined medium with 10 mM DL-malate as sole substrate under an initial headspace gas atmosphere of 20 % v/v O2 F . The ratio of photosynthetic pigments depends on the redox conditions The pigment stoichiometry in L. syltensis varied widely and depended on the incubation conditions 
 he wavelength dependence of pigment production was tested under the following cultivation conditions which allowed a high expression of the photosynthetic apparatus in the respective strains L. syltensis DSM 22749T was grown in SYMHC medium under an initial headspace gas atmosphere of 20 % v/v O2 C. halotolerans DSM 23344T in SYM medium containing 0.5 % v/v Tween 80 under air atmosphere and P. rubra DSM 19751T in defined medium containing 5 mM DLmalate under an initial headspace gas atmosphere of 12 % v/v O2 
 nly in cells of C. halotolerans cytochromes containing heme b could be clearly detected besides the dominating c-type cytochromes by a shoulder around 434 nm in dithionite-reduced minus Figure 5 Analyses of the transcription level of cytochromes and terminal oxidases in correlation with the expression of the photosynthetic apparatus in C. litoralis DSM 17192T 
 ultures were grown under the following incubation conditions 1 with 6 mM malate as sole carbon source and an initial head space gas atmosphere of 6 % v/v O2 2 in SYPG complex medium at an initial head space gas atmosphere of 12 % ( v/v O2 ( 3 with 3 mM sucrose at an initial head space gas atmosphere of 12 % ( v/v O2 
 he expression of cytochromes was determined under the following cultivation conditions which allowed a high expression of photosynthetic pigments and mixotrophic growth in the respective strains L. syltensis DSM 22749T was cultured in SYMHC medium under air atmosphere red line , C. halotolerans DSM 23344T blue line and P. rubra DSM 19751T green line in defined medium containing 10 mM DL-malate at an initial head space gas atmosphere of 20 % v/v O2 
 eaks at 424 and 553 nm indicate the presence of cytochrome c and the peak around 602 nm cytochrome a shoulders in the Soret region at 434 and 445 nm the presence of cytochromes b and a respectively 
 lternatively the second messenger p ppGpp responsible for inducing and maintaining the stringent response in most gammaproteobacteria could promote the expression of photosynthesis genes in response to the limited availability of complex nutrients 
 or the illumination of cultures with light of distinct wavelengths LED lamps were used emitting blue green and red visible light with peak wavelengths of 627 518 and 466 nm respectively 
 he concentrations of bacteriopheophytin a bacteriochlorophyll a and spirilloxanthin in the acetone/methanol extracts were determined from the absorbance values obtained at 747 771 and 475 nm respectively using the spectral reconstruction method of van der Rest and Gingras 31 
 ence an additional DNase treatment in solution was applied to obtain DNA-free RNA . Page 10 of 11 Reverse transcriptase-PCR RT-PCR of mRNA was performed with the OneStep RT-PCR kit of Qiagen following the instructions given by the manufacturer and using 0.5 μg of total RNA 
 ene-specific primers are listed in Table 1 and the following thermal cycler conditions were used for amplification reverse transcription at 50°C for 30 min an initial step at 95°C for 15 min and then 30 cycles at 94°C for 30 s 58°C for 1 min and 72°C for 1 min 
 T-PCR products were visualized using the FlashGel electrophoresis system with DNA Cassettes 2.2 % agarose from Lonza Verviers Belgium and a Kodak EDAS 290 imaging system 
 uthor details 1 Leibniz Institute DSMZ – German Collection of Microorganisms and Cell Cultures Inhoffenstr . 7B Braunschweig 38124 Germany . 2Helmholtz-Centre for Infection Research HZI Research Group Microbial Communication Inhoffenstr . 7 Braunschweig 38124 Germany . 3Present address Observatoire Océanologique de Banyuls , Université P. et M 
 utin N Suzuki MT Teeling H Weber M Venter JC Rusch DB Béjà O Assessing diversity and biogeography of aerobic anoxygenic phototrophic bacteria in surface waters of the Atlantic and pacific oceans using the global ocean sampling expedition metagenomes 
 rinkhoff T Giebel H-A Simon M Diversity ecology and genomics of the Roseobacter clade a short overview 
 raeken K Moris M Daniels R Vanderleyden J Michiels J New horizons for p ppGpp in bacterial and plant physiology 
 shida Y Eguchi M Kadota H Existence of obligately oligotrophic bacteria as a dominant population in the south China Sea and the west Pacific Ocean 
 in L Dragnea V Bauer CE PpsR a regulator of heme and bacteriochlorophyll biosynthesis is a heme-sensing protein 
 auer CE Elsen S Swem LR Swem DL Masuda S Redox and light regulation of gene expression in photosynthetic prokaryotes 
 appas CT Sram J Moskvin OV Ivanov PS Mackenzie RC Choudhary M Land ML Larimer FW Kaplan S Gomelsky M Construction and validation of the Rhodobacter sphaeroides 2.4.1 DNA microarray transcriptome flexibility at diverse growth modes 
 t was estimated that up to 5.7 % of the total phototrophic energy flow in open ocean waters could rely on bacteriochlorophyll a BChl a -based photophosphorylation 6,7 
 ultures were incubated under dim light with 12 % v/v O2 in the headspace gas atmosphere 
 he effect of substrate reduction on pigment production is demonstrated by cultivation in defined media containing 10 mM of the respective carbon source 
 imilar results were obtained upon cultivation in closed serum bottles if either the oxygen concentration was reduced at a constant substrate concentration or the substrate concentration increased at a constant oxygen concentration 
 evertheless a stimulation of pigment production in the tested strains was never observed by a lowering of the concentrations of carbon sources to 1 – 2 mM in order to imitate oligotrophic growth conditions 
 nterestingly no effect of substrate utilization or oxygen concentration on pigment production was found in several members of the Roseobacter clade that were studied in this respect 10,11 , which may be due to the use of different regulatory pathways or a more stable cellular redox state in these bacteria compared to members of the OM60/NOR5 clade 
 t the end a postelongation at 72°C for 5 min was carried out 
 ami R Cottrell MT Ras J Ulloa O Obernosterer I Claustre H Kirchman DL Lebaron P High abundances of aerobic anoxygenic photosynthetic bacteria in the South Pacific Ocean 
 olber ZS Plumley FG Lang AS Beatty JT Blankenship RE VanDover CL Vetriani C Koblížek M Rathenberg C Falkowski PG Contribution of aerobic photoheterotrophic bacteria to the carbon cycle in the Ocean 
 oblížek M Mlcousková J Kolber Z Kopecký J On the photosynthetic properties of marine bacterium COL2P belonging to Roseobacter clade 
 an der Rest M Gingras G The pigment complement of the photosynthetic reaction center isolated from Rhodospirillum rubrum 
 n most cases this procedure yielded ca . 10 μg of extracted total RNA as determined by photometric analysis at 260 nm 
 lsen S Jaubert M Pignol D Giraud E PpsR a multifaceted regulator of photosynthesis gene expression in purple bacteria 
 