Chemical Engineering Journal 300 2016 291–299 Contents lists available at ScienceDirect Chemical Engineering Journal journal homepage www.elsevier.com/locate/cej Seasonal monitoring of bacteria and archaea in a full-scale thermophilic anaerobic digester treating food waste-recycling wastewater Correlations between microbial community characteristics and process variables Joonyeob Lee a,1 Gyuseong Han a,1 Seung Gu Shin a ⇑ Taewoan Koo a Kyungjin Cho b Woong Kim c Seokhwan Hwang a ⇑ a School of Environmental Science and Engineering Pohang University of Science and Technology Pohang Gyeongbuk 790-784 Republic of Korea Center for Water Resource Cycle Research Korea Institute of Science and Technology 39-1 Hawolgok-Dong Seongbuk-Gu Seoul 136-791 Republic of Korea c Department of Environmental Engineering Kyungpook National University Daegu Republic of Korea b h i g h l i g h t s +  Na and lipid could affect COD removal and bacteria community . +  Na and lipid could affect archaeal quantity but not its community structure . +  Gelria and Cardiocoprobacter were negatively correlated with Na and lipid .  NH3 had no correlation with COD removal or with total microbial populations .  Methanoculleus Methanobacterium Tepidanaerobacter responded differently to NH3 . a r t i c l e i n f o Article history Received 10 January 2016 Received in revised form 16 April 2016 Accepted 18 April 2016 Available online 21 April 2016 Keywords Anaerobic digestion 454 pyrosequencing Real-time quantitative polymerase chain reaction Sodium inhibition Syntrophic bacteria Hydrogenotrophic methanogens a b s t r a c t Microbial population size community structure and diversity and the correlations of these characteristics with process variables were investigated in samples taken seasonally over two years from a full-scale thermophilic anaerobic digester treating food waste-recycling wastewater FRW 
epidanaerobacter Anaerobaculum Defluviitoga Keratinibaculum Gelria Tepidimicrobium Caldicoprobacter Bacillus and Syntrophaceticus were the major bacterial genera and Methanoculleus and Methanobacterium were the major archaeal genera 
hese concentrations could also significantly affect the bacterial community structure e.g. negative correlations with Gelria , but not archaeal community structure 
ixteen bacterial genera that showed relative abundance > 0.5 % in one of the eight samples were considered high-rank groups Tepidanaerobacter 20.6 ± 15.1 % , Anaerobaculum 19.1 ± 18.6 % , Defluviitoga 10.4 ± 8.9 % , Keratinibaculum 8.1 ± 8.3 % , Gelria 7.9 ± 8.2 % , Tepidimicrobium 3.4 ± 5.0 % , Caldicoprobacter 2.5 ± 1.2 % , Bacillus 1.8 ± 4.4 % , Syntrophaceticus 1.7 ± 2.8 % , Ruminiclostridium 0.6 ± 1.1 % , Lactobacillus 0.4 ± 0.6 % , Halocella 0.3 ± 0.3 % , Proteiniphilum 0.3 ± 0.6 % , Methyloversatilis 0.2 ± 0.3 % , Syntrophomonas 0.2 ± 0.2 % , Haloplasma 0.1 ± 0.3 % ( Fig 2a 
mong these sixteen genera Tepidanaerobacter Anaerobaculum Defluviitoga Keratinibaculum Gelria Tepidimicrobium Caldicoprobacter Bacillus and Syntrophaceticus were dominant 96 % of the average abundance of classified bacterial genera and each contributing P 1.0 % on average Fig . 2a . 454 pyrosequencing of the eight samples yielded 8 130 nonchimeric archaeal 16S rRNA gene sequence reads 3 822 ( 478 ± 642 reads per sample remained as rigid reads and were grouped into nine OTUs for further analysis 
t includes one known species Gelria glutamica which was isolated from a propionate-oxidizing methanogenic enrichment culture 40 
he relative abundances of Gelria and Syntrophomonas were correlated negatively with Na+ and lipid , but positively with COD removal and lipid removal Fig . 4 
nhibition of Gelria and Syntrophomonas by Na+ and lipid has not been reported previously so the contributions of these genera to COD removal or lipid removal were investigated 
revious research also supports the significance contribution of Gelria to production of H2 which may then be utilized by HMs in a thermophilic AD system to degrade cellulose and microbial protein 41 
hus Gelria sp . may be an indicator of process performance in thermophilic AD systems that treat food waste or food wastewater 
his work was also supported by ‘ ‘ Human Resources Program in Energy Technology ” of the Korea Institute of Energy Technology Evalua- 1 Temporal variation of organic composition in the FRW was high high lipid in the digester may result from high lipid in the influent FRW . Na+ and lipid in the digester was negatively correlated with COD removal of the AD system but ammonia was not . 2 Tepidanaerobacter Anaerobaculum and Defluviitoga Keratinibaculum Gelria Tepidimicrobium Caldicoprobacter Bacillus and Syntrophaceticus were dominant bacterial genera and Methanoculleus and Methanobacterium were dominant archaeal genera . 3 Both total bacterial and archaeal populations were positively correlated with COD removal but negatively correlated with Na+ and lipid in the digester 
tams Gelria glutamica gen. nov. sp . nov. a thermophilic obligately syntrophic glutamate-degrading anaerobe Int 
elria 7.9 % was the fifth dominant genus 
elria could contribute to COD removal by degrading glutamate in syntrophic relationship with HMs 
elria and Cardiocoprobacter showed opposite responses to Na+ and lipid in the digester and may be microbial indicators of process abnormality in thermophilic CSTR AD systems that treat FRW . Ammonia in the digester could solely affect both bacterial and archaeal community structures especially in the dominance and the variations in SAOB i.e. Tepidanaerobacter and HMs i.e. Methanoculleus Methanobacterium genera which were explained by variation in ammonia . 5 Bacterial diversity was negatively correlated with lipid 
