International Journal of Systematic and Evolutionary Microbiology (2001), 51, 711–713  Printed in Great Britain  LETTER TO THE EDITOR Rhodocista centenaria vs Rhodospirillum centenum : a reply to Gest and Favinger In an accompanying letter, Gest & Favinger (2001) have documented an interesting case where two different names are applied to the same organism, namely Rhodospirillum centenum and Rhodocista centenaria 
aving provided a brief overview of the interesting properties of the organism which they described as Rhodospirillum centenum (Favinger et al., 1989), the authors raise the point that Kawasaki et al. (1992) indicate in the title of their paper that they were describing Rhodocista centenaria sp. nov 
he authors correctly indicate that both the names Rhodospirillum centenum and Rhodocista centenaria were assigned the same priority number, ‘ 2 ’, which one may infer means that the request for valid publication of both names was received on the same day 
hus, the proper citation of the names are Rhodocista centenaria Kawasaki et al. 1994 (Kawasaki et al., 1994) and Rhodospirillum centenum Favinger et al. 1994 (Favinger et al., 1994) 
f ATCC 43720 (l IAM 14193) is considered to be a member of the genus Rhodospirillum, then it must be called Rhodospirillum centenum Favinger et al. 1994, but should it be placed in another genus, then it must be called Rhodocista centenaria Kawasaki et al. 1994 
owever, since the name Rhodocista is derived from the Greek (rhodos l red) and Latin (cista l basket), meaning the ‘ red basket ’, there should be no confusion, because the name does not mean the ‘ red cyst ’ 
hus, Kawasaki et al. (1992) were at liberty to designate their genus Rhodocista as a new genus (gen. nov.), and in the absence of any other validly published name for the species they could only create a new species name Rhodocista centenaria sp. nov 
espite the low confidence levels from the bootstrap values, this is not significant if one considers that Kawasaki et al. (1992) were dealing with three species in three genera, Rhodocista centenaria, Rhodospirillum rubrum and Magnetospirillum gryphiswaldense 
espite the criticism of Gest & Favinger (2001), Kawasaki et al. (1992) used not only the 16S rDNA data, but also the data of Favinger et al. (1989) and additional chemotaxonomic data to support the separation of Rhodospirillum centenum from Rhodospirillum rubrum, creating the new genus Rhodocista 
hile Gest and Favinger have presented a list of objections to using the name Rhodocista centenaria based on ‘ inconsistencies ’ in the Bacteriological Code, closer examination of their points indicates that there is obviously a need to communicate the workings of the Bacteriological Code to a wider audience 
n essence the problem boils down to a simple matter of taxonomic opinion, whether one considers Rhodocista centenaria Kawasaki et al. 1994 to be the correct name of the taxon, or whether the correct name of the taxon is Rhodospirillum centenum Favinger et al. 1994, with the associated debate whether one should define one genus or two, and that is something which the Bacteriological Code does not attempt to clarify 
awasaki, H., Hoshino, Y., Kuraishi, Y. & Yamasato, K. (1992).  Rhodocista centenaria gen. nov., sp. nov., a cyst-forming anoxygenic photosynthetic bacterium and its phylogenetic position in the Proteobacteria alpha group 
yst Appl Microbiol 13, 361–371.  Kawasaki, H., Hoshino, Y., Kuraishi, Y. & Yamasato, K. (1994).  Rhodocista centenaria gen. nov., sp. nov 
