Letter pubs.acs.org/OrgLett Isolation Structure Elucidation Biosynthesis and Synthesis of Antalid a Secondary Metabolite from Polyangium species Thomas Tautz † Judith Hoﬀmann ‡ Thomas Hoﬀmann ‡ Heinrich Steinmetz § Peter Washausen § Brigitte Kunze § Volker Huch ∥ Andreas Kitsche ⊥ Hans Reichenbach § Gerhard Höﬂe § Rolf Müller ‡ and Markus Kalesse* † § † Institute for Organic Chemistry Leibniz Universität Hannover Schneiderberg 1B D-30167 Hannover Germany Helmholtz Institute for Pharmaceutical Research Saarland Helmholtz Centre for Infection Research and Department of Pharmaceutical Biotechnology Saarland University Building E8.1 D-66123 Saarbrücken Germany § Helmholtz Centre for Infection Research HZI Inhoﬀenstr . 7 D-38124 Braunschweig Germany ∥ Institute for Inorganic Chemistry Saarland University Building B2.2 D-66123 Saarbrücken Germany ⊥ Institute for Biostatistics Leibniz Universität Hannover Herrenhäuser Straße 2 D-30419 Hannover Germany ‡ S Supporting Information * ABSTRACT The isolation structure elucidation and synthesis of antalid 1 , a novel secondary metabolite from Polyangium sp. , is described herein 
n addition the biosynthetic origin of this hybrid PKS-NRPS natural product was unraveled by the in silico analysis of its biosynthetic gene cluster . M yxobacteria are known to be a reliable source of novel natural products with often unique structural features that are rarely observed in other organisms.1,2 To date more than 100 secondary metabolites with diﬀerent core structures and various biological activities have been isolated from myxobacterial sources.3 A majority of these metabolites derive from nonribosomal peptide synthetases polyketide synthases or are hybrids thereof.4,5 Already in 2001 we isolated antalid from Polyangium sp. strain Pl 4620 and determined its constitution.6 In the course of our current HPLC−MS based screening project the crude extract from a liquid culture of the same Polyangium sp . was re-evaluated and showed a secondary metabolite with m/z = 528.2518 for the M + H + ion 
XXX XXX XXX−XXX Letter Organic Letters Figure 2 . A Organization of the ant biosynthetic gene cluster in Polyangium spumosum MSr6761 . B Proposed biosynthetic route to antalid formation in P. spumosum 
n summary we have isolated and characterized the novel secondary metabolite antalid 1 from Polyangium spec . and P. spumosum Pl 4620 
